XS✔ ◾ Sql server performance (#7655)
SSWConsulting/SSW.Rules.Content: rules/sql-server-io-pressure/rule.md

  - sql-server-memory-pressure
---
So you've identified that your SQL Server is under IO pressure. What can you do about it?

<!--endintro-->

If disk is being used by SQL Server, try the following:

1. Identify any high IO queries and optimize
2. Check whether more memory might allow caching to dramatically reduce disk IO
3. Identify whether database files under high load can be on separate disks, maybe splitting each file up into several each on a separate disk.

## Identify any high IO queries and optimize

Use the Query Store view Top Resource Consuming Queries in SSMS. Look for high values of Logical Reads, Logical Writes and Physical Reads. These indicate IO intensive queries.

Here's a simple in-depth presentation on techniques to optimize SQL queries and reduce the IO required.

`youtube: https://youtu.be/l18ltcOVN4I?si=Ejf0sGKECfuqFw2L`

## Try adding more memory

This solution is often a quick and easy solution that may be less expensive than more extensive optimization.
If the cost is not overly high, it often provides a better return on investment than spending large amounts of effort on optimization.

## Identify the database files under pressure

> Use the following query from <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/troubleshoot/sql/database-engine/performance/troubleshoot-sql-io-performance> to identify which database files are under pressure.

Reviewer: **suggestion**: Make the link easier to read.
```suggestion
Use the following query from the Microsoft Learn article [Troubleshoot slow SQL Server performance caused by I/O issues](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/troubleshoot/sql/database-engine/performance/troubleshoot-sql-io-performance) to identify which database files are under pressure.
```

                                       AND is_user_process = 1
```

If these waits exceed 10-15 milliseconds consistently, I/O is considered a bottleneck.

### PAGEIOLATCH_EX

Occurs when a task is waiting on a latch for a data or index page (buffer) in an I/O request. The latch request is in the Exclusive mode. An Exclusive mode is used when the buffer is being written to disk. Long waits may indicate problems with the disk subsystem.

### PAGEIOLATCH_SH

Occurs when a task is waiting on a latch for a data or index page (buffer) in an I/O request. The latch request is in the Shared mode. The Shared mode is used when the buffer is being read from the disk. Long waits may indicate problems with the disk subsystem.

### PAGEIOLATCH_UP

Occurs when a task is waiting on a latch for a buffer in an I/O request. The latch request is in the Update mode. Long waits may indicate problems with the disk subsystem.

### WRITELOG

Occurs when a task is waiting for a transaction log flush to complete. A flush occurs when the Log Manager writes its temporary contents to disk. Common operations that cause log flushes are transaction commits and checkpoints.

> Common reasons for long waits on WRITELOG are:

Reviewer: **issue**: The paragraphs that follow should be dot-points.

Author: Turned them into level 5 headings, they were horrible as dot points :)

title: What to do about SQL Server IO Pressure?
guid: 83475165-1eba-47bc-a243-b9d4706ae5d5
uri: sql-performance-io-pressure
created: 2023-12-27T07:26:54.0000000Z
authors:
  - title: Bryden Oliver
    url: https://ssw.com.au/people/bryden-oliver
related: 
  - identify-sql-performance-sql-server
  - identify-sql-performance-azure
  - sql-server-cpu-pressure
  - sql-server-memory-pressure
---
So you've identified that your SQL Server is under IO pressure. What can you do about it?

<!--endintro-->

Here's a simple in-depth presentation on techniques to reduce IO pressure.

`youtube: https://youtu.be/l18ltcOVN4I?si=Ejf0sGKECfuqFw2L`

If disk is being used by SQL Server, try the following:

1. Identify any high IO queries and optimize
2. Check whether more memory might allow caching to dramatically reduce disk IO
3. Identify whether database files under high load can be on separate disks, maybe splitting each file up into several each on a separate disk.

## Identify any high IO queries and optimize

Use the Query Store view Top Resource Consuming Queries in SSMS. Look for high values of Logical Reads, Logical Writes and Physical Reads. These indicate IO intensive queries.

> READ MY PRESENTATION FOR HELP on OPTIMISING QUERIES

Reviewer: **question**: Is there meant to be a link to slides, or is this a reference to the YouTube video above?

Author: Fixed

## Try adding more memory

> This solution is often a quick and easy solution that may be for lower cost than more extensive optimization.

Reviewer: **suggestion**: Grammar.
```suggestion
This solution is often a quick and easy solution that may be less expensive than more extensive optimization.
```
